~1ST-PIDG~                             Parent link: <p-c_docs.ex>
                                                   <outline.hyp>

`Earliest recorded pidgin`

The first recorded pidgin lect dates from the eleventh century,
consisting of a brief passage of restructured Arabic used in
central Mauritania as a trade jargon.  Although only re-
discovered in 1982, it was recorded by the Arab geographer
(living in Spain) Abu 'Ubayd al-Bakrí in 1068 C.E.  He quotes a
traveler to the Mauritanian town of Maridi as asserting that
"'The Blacks have mutilated our beautiful language and spoiled
its eloquence with their twisted tongues,'"followed by a ten-line
sample of the variety.  The lexicon of the passage is drawn from
Arabic except for "kyk," meaning "the people," which may be from
the Songhai bound morphemes "-koi" +  plural "-k." Holm refers
mostly to the Arabic nature of passage being re-structured,
considering similarities beterween creolized and standard
varieties of modern Arabic.

The subject of the passage was a man who was traveling with his
son and a camel to a place where "the people" ("kyk") were
located.  In a familiar fable, the man was called a barbarian,
first for letting his son walk while he rode and then for walking
while his son rode.  He ended up by dismissing "the people"
("kuk") as "neither good nor important."  {<inc> Thomason and
Elgibali 1986 in <inc> Holm88 14, 568-571} 

Holm, (and I assume, Thomason and Elgibali) implicitly considers
the speaker to be Mauritanian.  However, al-Bakrí apparently
refers (at least in Thomason's and Elgibali's translation) to the
speaker as one of the "Blacks."   Mauritania was a middle ground
between sub-Saharan Africa and its neighbors to the north.  In
any literature that I know of, sub-Saharans are the only ones
labelled as "Blacks" and the "land of the Blacks" is consistently
used to refer to the sub-Saharan region.  The Mauritanians had
their own moniker, the "Moors" (from "Maur-"), of whom al Bakrí
was probably one {<inc> --connect or include in a section on
"Moor" and "Black"}, he living in Moorish Spain.  The speaker of
mangled Arabic was probably sub-Saharan.  The "-koi" etymology
given by Holm strengthens this assertion.  Self-referents to "the
people" seem universally distributed {<inc> --refer to Brown's
_Human Universals_ for concept of universal distribution} as
ethnonyms, as well as reference to anyone from outside the group
as some form of "barbarian."  The fact that the "barbarian," who
was the subject of the tale (he was not the narrrator), rode a
camel, points further to his Saharan-or-north origin.  The upshot
is that the source of the pidginization (as opposed to the
lexical source of the pidgin itself) was most likely sub-Saharan,
possibly a Songhai trading in the middle ground of Maridi and
relating a story to the northern traveler.   
    This would provide evidence that any non-bioprogram or human
universal independent model of monogenetic diffusion of a
relexification strategy (as opposed to the relexifier, or target,
language) originated in sub-Saharan Africa according to the best
current documentation.  Al-Bakrí's manuscript antedates the First
Crusade (1095), often marked as the source of Sabir, by three
decades.  The strategy of pidginizing languages (as opposed to
the language that is pidginized), if not a universal, must in
light of this evidence be attributed to sub-Saharan Africa if the
same standards used for arguments of European origin are applied.


 ~1st-pidg~


