┌──────────────────────────────────╥────────────────────────────┐
│ ~boundary                        ║ UP: <                      │
│ TYPEOVER                         ║ NEXT: open                 │
│                                  ║ <outline.hyp -             │
└──────────────────────────────────╨────────────────────────────┘
    Boundary transgressions are always analyzed etically.  One
is not necessarily trespassing by leaving the boundaries of one's
home.  Trespass is when some "other" entity invades the
parameters of one's home (including such things as permission and
ownership as well as physical space.  Border skirmishes are
fought because of mutual etic analyses that an "other" has
transgressed the societies' respective  boundaries--never would a
society go to war _because_ it crossed its own boundaries,
regardless of the fact that war might be the result.  
    From an emic perspective boundaries are parametric.  They
are not maintained from within unless in tension with some
outside force. {<inc> James on consciousness}  Interactionist
approaches get tangled on the very boundary they seek to remove
in the act of critiquing structuralist approaches from the
outside.  Boundaries are attributed to the interaction process
and then dismissed as insignificant because they are its product. 
Emic approaches, which the interactionists espouse, need be
concerned with these boundaries only when they arise. 
Interactionists can dismiss structuralist boundaries that they do
not interact with and structuralists can dismiss boundaries that
are not part of their structures.  Both use emic approaches, but
they ask different questions.
    If two candles light a space, no one would claim "there is
only one candle because the boundaries between the light from one
candle and the light from another are not clear."  In terms of
illumination, the boundaries of any space are a function of what,
if any, surfaces would reside within that space.  If there are no
surfaces then there are no boundaries. In Labov's etic model, the 
'light community' of one candle would be the aggregate set of
illuminated and shadowed aspects of all the surfaces in the
(clearly delimited) confines of a space. <soclab03.00>
Interactionists would note that the observer (or its instrument)
is also a part of the illuminated and shadowed surfaces and
cannot observe itself from outside without the aid of yet another
observer with the same problem (ad infinitum), making one set of
surfaces always present for observation to occur, rendering
Labovian definitions impossible to complete and candles lighting
a surfaceless space impossible to observe.  Their conclusion is
that models of speech and definitions of speech community are
absolutely relative.  
    The issue that structuralist school and its epistemological
descendents (encompassing the constellation of Saussure-
Bloomfeld-Chomsky by standard sociolinguistic definitions) is
concerned with is not the effects of the light on the surfaces in
the space, but how the candles go about producing light. 
Inferences can be made by perhaps covering one light and
examining the effects that has on the lighted surfaces, but there
is no etic concern for drawing a boundary between one set of
illuminatory effects and the other.  Communities are recognized
to cluster into what Wittgenstein refered to as "family
resemblances" {<inc> jump to Wittgenstein, Rausch, G. Lakoff} but
the object of study is how the candles work rather than what the
effects of the candles are.  
    This by no means denies that the lit candles have effects,
not all of which are concerned with illumination, but it does
ignore this as a theoretical issue.  Interactionist (absolute
relativist) critiques observe that the effects cannot be ignored
because these hypothetical candles cannot be observed without
introducing an effected surface--the observer.  They do not
however, self-reflect upon the effect that their own observations
have on the dictum of absolute relativity (or the effect of that
self-observation; or the effect of this observation, and so
forth...)  
    The principles of calculus provide the means of
pragmatically, though not absolutely, accommodating this paradox. 
What is needed to stop the derivative spiral of navel gazing or
the integral trap of unwarranted assumptions is to treat
approaches as _approaches toward limits_ rather than as _paths to
destinations_. {<inc> go to multiple perspectives}.  This
approach privileges the continual process of _modelling_ over any
discrete modelling event or its resultant model.  It renders
models as provisional and subject to revision upon confronting
the findings of other approaches.  It recognizes absolute and
relative as directions rather than destinations. <cogcon01>
--two solutions--claculus and multiple perspectives--modelling
rather than models, with conclusions provisional rather than
laws.
