Power relations and the evolution of language:
stage one:
Primary representation: self other -- "I" --maintenance of this bohjundary's viability, whether as ind. or community is advantageuos for living.

power--if bigger, can dismiss other's boundaries--if in same community, it would be a disadvantage to execute that power every time -- if it could be expressed without execution,  both could keep viable boundaries, making group more powerful--how express it?  What if try to execute power, but reptor dodges, then continues proximity b/c advantageous.  execution of power could develop into a feint--this is secondary representation--still immediate--conventionalized into a semiotic system of enexecuted representations--feints.  "I" "You"--relationship--could then represent, by E==>I transformation, the group into an aggregate into an agent, a new "I," namely "WE," that can interact wit things outside its parameters, the new "YOU," namely a bootstrapped secondary representation (a representation of a representation of a representation), "IT."  
This is no longer a semiotic system.  Once this bootstrapping principle is in place, it (or "IT") can be extended, reversed (I==>E), further bootstrapped, and so forth.  By the E==>I transformation, new agents can be constructed rationally infinitely.  From the I==>E transformation, infinite new discoveries can be made and tested empirically.  

From hence would such faculties arise?  Such a system of extrapolation and derivation is useful in predicting and explaining the world, what is happening, etc.  At some point a breakthrough was made--this way ofmaking sense of the world, shared by many species (Seyfarth and Cheyney, The bee guy, and so forth) was found to be re-directable.  Not only could humans make sense of an outside world and respond to it, they found that the "making sense" could be recversed, and projected back onto the world, as it were.  This is the breakthrough upon which language rests.  I believe Chomsky is right in positing the autonomy of language in this regard.  It is a specialized form of this redirected "making sense."  another specialized, and overlapping domain is culture, whereby people coinstruct sensible worlds rather than just living in them.  The byproducts of language and culture are communication and society, which themselves have been made sense of by granting them autonomous boundaries or parameters (or not). 
Making sense becomes interactive in its directionality.  This is manipulation, and is not unique to humans.  What is unique, apparently, is the ability to extrapolate and derive away from and toward the immediate, including the process of extrapolation/derivatrion as input to itself.  Bickerton's model, which privileges language as the human breakthrough, can be simplified, with no loss, by making "culture" (in a very specific definition of the word) the breakthrough, and language as the performance of that culture.  Language is the representation of cultural representation.

Returning to issues of language, the series of bootstraps might run like this.  

I am Here! (all else is there)
You are there (I recognize that to you, you are here)
I am here and you are there OR We are here (and all else is there)
We/I BE here and YOU/IT BE there. (and to it, WE/I BE there)
To it, it is here and that is there 
--e.g. I observe: when the dogs caught sight of the deer they ran after it. If I generalize this, it becomes a cultural belief that I can manipulate to my advantage.  If I represent my thought in language (yet another bootstrappping operation) that can then be observed and manipulated as well.

Bootstrapping I==>E or E==>I is a transformation, one unique to humans.  It is not a category, but a way of getting to categories.  It is a problematic thing, for when I==>E, inherence, or ineffability, or organic-ness and perhaps agency is lost.  Conversely, When E==>I, context, analyzability, boundaries and objectiveness are sacrificed.  Furthermore, once the transformation is made, it can be made again, ad infinitum, often with practical (though forever diminishing) returns.  If too much is lost in the transformation, it becomes absurd, although absurdity too can be transformated or transformized (a transformation in the direction of creation is -ated, one in the direction of analysis is -ized.  This puts direction, a history, on the synchronic transformation.)
