The theory of yesterday came before today 



connect all this to stuff on time and ahistoricism biounbdaries and community in hypertext project

Analytic thinking suffers from chronic atemporalism.  The first requirement of analytic thought is to bound off a portion of the universe, henceforth a segment, and treat that as if it were a whole to be further segmented.  Problem-solving becomes a matter of decomposition to the smallest possible segment.  Theory building becomes the construction of consistent models from undecomposable segments and their interactions. 

The problem comes in assigning time to segments, such as "yesterday" and "today" 

Lewonin's argument against the consideration of evolution in cognitive theories is that there are an infinite number of plausible theories, none of which can ever be known to be true.  What he offers is the full extension of the standard Humean skeptical argument, but applied only to one segment of time, the domain of evolution ("yesterday").  This is all well and good, but why would a cognitive scientist insist on invoking the full implications of skepticism in regards to one segment of time (evolutionary "yesterday") and not another (the "today" of cognitive science)?  The standard response is that yesterday involves a dearth of observable data--not a lack of any data, but rather a lack of enough data to prove the truth of the theory.  Thus only the present, viz. the segment of time within which time can be factored out or managed ("today") can be considered in a valid theory.

Hume on Miracles:
What is this segment that we are calling "today"--can it be demonstrated? Or is it stipulated (usually tacitly) at the outset of an empirical inquiry as something to make a theory "work" without falling into the abyss of time, causal skepticism, and infinite regress before it can even be begun?  How can an inquiry of the "present" be undertaken?
The first task is to make a timeless point, the present instant, into a locale in which analysis can take place.  This requires a segmentable space, something a point cannot provide.  So accomodations are made. The "present" is changed, by stipulation, into a segment, call it "today."  Time operates normally within today except that it is detached at some point from "yesterday," though seldom, in the sciences, from "tomorrow."  The length of "today" is arbitrary and adjustable to the inquiry at hand.  A theory becomes yesterdays as soon as it is obsolete.  "Today" is merely a device for stipulating that what occurs outside it is subject to normal Humean skeptical arguments, but what is within it is not constrained so.  Today's theories are useful for predicting tomorrow.  Yesterday's theories, by the evidence of today, were not. Usually "today" is not called anything--only that time which exists outside the segment is named.  Alternately, it may be called the "present," but this is a conflation of a segment with a point, a move not without consequence.  
This is all well and good until the time comes to implement the theory or make truth claims about the theory using some demonstration of correspondence with the "real" world.  Of course, the real world is also a theoretical construct that can only escape skeptical arguments by fiat.  Let the fiat be made.  Thus, the first thing that one's theory has in correspondence with the real world is that both have, via decree, dispensed with skeptical arguments at the outset, while what exists outside it--viz. "yesterday" and all other such unverified segments, points, and assorted unruly sundries--has not. 
The implementation problem arises from the demonstrable fact that there are limits to empiricism.  Cause cannot be attributed to correlation.  Proof can only be disconfirmatory. A world simply stipulated as "real" is no more real than a world stipulated as anything else.  
One demonstrable and much theorized aspect of the "real" real world is that it continually and irreversibly moves through time.  Even the relativist's universe obeys this.  The only thing known is about cause is that its effects cannot precede it.  No known observation can deny the workings of time without invoking either a miracle or a new discovery in need of demonstration.  The invocation of a miracle is subject to another variety of Hume's skepticism: The only way a miracle could be believed true is if it would be more of a miracle for the being reporting it to be lying.  Such a proof would of course be immediately overcome by its own miraculousness.  
The point is that there is a real verification problem.  one is left with three choices: 1) mark off a temporal domain within which skepticism is assumed away (like the codition of perfect competition assumed in Solow's economics); 2) take the full extension of the skeptical critique of empiricism into account, leaving one with a choice of mysticism or existentialism; 3) globally assume away skeptical critcisms by removing the arbitrary line between "today" and "yesterday," opening a pandora's box of what Lewontin refers to as "plausible stories."
Given the present state of knowledge, pragmatism need enter to spare science from philosophers.  Fortunately for science it abounds in many denominations which can be roughly typed in the same groups as the three responses to the verification problem: 
pragmatism 1:	Buys things "within the realm" but not linked to the global economy of ideas: like pre-perestroika rubles, and subject to the similar problems upon any attempt to align it with a global system.
pragmatism 2:	No evidence, but it would be of the first quality were it to be found.  Lacking real evidence, use the next best evidence, gauging it by how well it works.  If the gauge of what is the best evidence is theory internal, then this is the same as pragmatism 1.
pragmatism 3:	Lots of evidence but its not worth anything, a big check kiting scam at its worst, buying on margins at best.  Risk of runaway inflation and collapse under pressures of overspeculation if not carefully monitored.  If the monitoring is theory internal then this is the same as pragmatism 1.
Obviously, what is needed is a checking mechanism outside the theory.  That theory also needs the same, and so on, such that the checking mechanism must eventually approach being global.  Of course, without pragmatism o some sort, nothing can be done, because one would need to account for everything in order to account for anything.  
The best bet is to assume things and see if the theory works without them.  These assumptions can be made upfront and results compared or they can be hidden under the mantle of objectivity. Obviously the former is to be prefereed in other people's thoeries and the latter is not to ber admitted in one's own. This placs wiliness at a premium. So it should be, but that is no reason for it to take the diguise of objectivity hiding its assdumptions all the time.  Let's let it come out in the open and do what it can.  Wiliness in this form would simply and openly shift assumptions when attacked.  For some reason, empirical theory tends to only allow one set of assumptions.  This is a last vestige of absolutism.  Lets leave it in place but place it within the pragmatic realism we have been slowly falling into.  By this I mean, let us allow only one set of assumptions at a time.  Thus our theory T of yesterday must operate under one set of assumptions but our theory T of yesterday may operate under another set.  Our only requirement is that we occassionally compare them, such as when "today's" theory becomes "yesterday's" and make note of what we do with the assumptions.  
It will become obvious on an instant's reflection that we are capable of holding only one set of assumptions at a time.  Let's not assume any of them true.  In fact, lets change assumptions without even defending them against attack and see what kind of theory we can build.  Thenm lets do it again.  Vast portions of these theories nmay coexist.  other portionsd will carve out some form of relief, contrasting with each other, providing a new best theory.  lets change its assumptions in the same way.  A vapid theory may soon be whittlesd to nothing.  A good theory will withstand repeated changes of perspective, perhaps offering new information from each angle.  of course, only one angle can be taken at a time, but that does not mean that no other angle can be recalled.
There are infinite plausible stories that could be told this way, but that is not the point.  A sculptor could make an infinite number of sculptures out of whatever is left of her block of marble.  She would be foolish, however, to cut say the fifth perspective of it as if she had not made cuts freom the other forty-nine perspectives.  If she wants to start anew, she must, and may, do so, but not on the old stone as it used to be.  She may even try out several combionations of perspectives on different blocks, finishing all or some with differing degrees of care, learning more about what she wants it to be a sculpture of as she progresses.  some of these may even be excellent in themselves.  The definitive piece may perhaps never be finished, attempted, or even conceived.  The theory, the art, resides not in the objects.  

SOME IMPLAUSIBLE THEORIES

An implausible theory is one that exists beyond the "light cone" of space time. The adoption of strong skepticism makes any attribution of cause to correlation subject to this problem.  Controls in a control-variable experiment are meant to remove all extraneous factors so that only one factor is in variation during repetitions of the test.  The problem is that there is no such thing as an absolute control.  A real control cannot be demonstrated because it would require the repetition to take place outside of the light cone, i.e. there would need to be temporal dimension to the present, a contradiction in teerms, or, as some speculate, there would need to be a "tear" in space time so that a spatio-temporal "worm" could loop back upon itself.  This is at the moment a proposition that has never been demonstrated.  If it were to be demonstrated, certain empirical testing that is now assumed could perhaps be realized, but in the lack of anything more than a theoretical conbstruct that remains intractable to testing for now, to make claims that "today" is somehow testable and "yesterday" is not are uncalledc for.  Even the demonstration of such a theory would undermine the proposition, as if the present could co-occur with the past, than both would be equally testable--which is not a claim that they would yet be testable at all--the properties of such a present are unknown.
Take Putnam's demoinstrations ofexternal meaning in the twin oscar case.  What he is positing is in essence multiple presents with a single variable ranging over a set of two members, H2O and XYZ.  This is a strong idealization of the control/variable type experiment.  Such an experiment can only take place unrealized.  The only place the possibility of more than one referent for "Water" exists is in the space of the irreal.  In space time, the only place this can exist is in the future.  As such a construct were realized, the variables would approach singularity as they approached the present.  Twin Oscar and his world can only exist mentally.  Thus any claim for externality is implausible.  This is in contrast with "just so" evolutionary tales, which are either plausible or else rejected in favor of more plausible tales.
