17th century Jamaica as an example of cultural creolization

    Creolization defined; and distinguished from pidginization

In the Atlantic world, children born into slavery combined, stabilized, and expanded the pidginized, African, and English constituents of their cultural environment to produce a creole language and culture.  They actively, if unconsciously, made sense of a fragmented world.  This is the process of creolization proper.  When used outside the field of linguistics, the term "creolization" refers to both pidgin and creole phases of the process, although it is one contention of this paper that the two processes need to be treated separately in extra-lingual applications as well.   
    Creole expansion

The first, or pidgin, generation had to negotiate and compromise on an ad hoc basis to reach any cultural understanding or sense of community.  Later creolized generations acquired this makeshift culture as native, expanding and formalizing it, making it fully their own.  They had molded the creole cultural language that later immigrants would have to learn as a cultural second language.  This reification elucidates the lack of explanatory power of most retentions: they are not sacrosanct traditions handed down reverently through the ages, but rather provisional solutions which only become native when a new generation acquires them as part of a cultural first language.  
    Mature creole culture--Jamaica

Today, African-Jamaican music and language exist in a mature creole culture.  Only its history distinguishes the culture from a non-creole culture (some linguists deny even this distinction, claiming creole origins for all languages, although this is hotly debated).  Most historical research into African-American cultures has focused on creole generations.  Descriptions such as those in Hans Sloane's travelogue allow the historian a glimpse into the earliest workings of African cultural transmission (to repeat Bilby's words) "in action at the individual level, where conscious creative decisions (as well as unconscious adjustments) were made."  This was a world ordered by decisions and processes much more individualistic and unpredictable than those of later, more stable communities, but the latter owe their existence and contents largely to the results of the former. 
17) identity--individual vs. communal

 As a result, none from the first generation could ever be quite at ease with the tentative music, language, or culture that their new community generated.
This captures the distinction between the expression of individual identity, which could be satisfactory, and the community identity, which was never quite the way anybody remembered it/wanted it to be to those who had lived long in Africa.   
