Precis of Hofstader, Escher Goedel and Bach, 
isoomrphism, thought and action, symbol systems, recursion

the isopmorphism between action and thought, the resembleance in these shapes leads to symbol systems which can be further manipulated
connectionism, modularity, symmetry and chemistry, particularly crystallography
RCR
the asymmetry of language, biology and life is in fact supersymmetry, like dna transcriptions--what is not kthere defines what goes there...<abduct.1>

modules in lang. are akin to elements, perhaps molecules--we do not know.
Connectionist parts are at "subatomic" level--we do not know atomic properties yet.
--chemistry, crystallography--finite patterns reapeat in infinite combination--generative capacity like language
Washburne and Crowe
Symmetries of Culture

"Since symmetries restrict the kinds of pattern arrangements possible, they form sort of a grammar.  but languages are each characterized by a different grammar [chomsky would disagree here]' the 'grammar' of repeated designs is universal.  All patterns are produced by the same rules; that is, pattern structures can change, but the rules for changing them cannot.  Meaning in such formal systems is inhjerent in the structuring of the parts." (10-11)

Symmetries are non-lexical (colors have names--only crystallographers name symmetries.  How to know meaningfulness and content of any putastiver meaning when naming is not presernt?  two ways:
study its role in perception and compare
study it in context

upshot of Julesz sterograms: we perceive symmetry, by which he meant bilateral symmetry, but not copying (glide symmetry)

"Symmetry is based on superposition.  Elements which are regularlyu superpositioned along an axis are thus regularly repeated.  The resulting pattern is said to be symmetrical.  This repetition,m called translation, is not only a class of symmetry, it is the heart of the concept of pattern." 20

Mirror reflection P translates to P' such that a perpindicular line is drawn from P to a line L and then contrinued to the same distance on the other side 

translation is  a shift  of somne distance d along a line, ie a vector of distance and direction.

glide is a translation followed byu a mirror reflection

symmetrical figures are more accurately reproduced than asymmetrical ones.  21-22

slightly asymmetrical stuff will be distored to symmetry by the viewer  22

bilateral symmetry is the one we are most sensitive to 22

Symmetry, then, is a cognitivew perceptual universal, basic to the processing of all shape information. A culture's symmetries are part of that culture's cognitive organization map." 24

while symmetry is a universal, preferences for one or another type are not.  See the work by
Donald Crowe on Africa's west coast in  biblio...on 
